this video is sponsored by Skillshare
boxed cake mixes have characteristics
that we simply cannot recreate here in
the home kitchen using conventional
ingredients why is that the case and how
does it affect the finished baked
results well we're going to do an
experiment where we bake the same cake
two ways we're going to talk to a
scientist about the surprisingly
sophisticated contents of this box and
we'll interrogate the philosophical
questions raised by all of this
including what's the point of making
anything from scratch field trip to the
Mill Hill Community Arts Center in Macon
Georgia where the Mill Hill bakers
collective is run by my friend Adriana
Horton it's a low-cost shared kitchen
space for indie bakers who have their
own respective businesses Adriana's
business is the oh honey baking company
and she makes my favorite cake which is
a cookies and cream cake first she's
gonna make it from her favorite box mix
one chocolate and one vanilla to make an
Oreo cake Duncan is my main squeeze it's
just the most consistent and it tastes
like chemicals you just mix in some eggs
water and oil but this whipping stage
which the instructions tell you to do is
absolutely key especially for boxed
mixes that's according to dr. Rebecca
Miller Regan a professor of bakery
science at Kansas State University in
order to get a cake to rise and to have
a nice crumb grain it's critical to get
air into that batter during mixing
that's the only place it comes from a
lot of people think that the chemical
leavening like your baking powder or
baking soda makes the air bubbles it
doesn't
dr. Miller says this chemical reaction
merely makes co2 which inflates existing
air bubbles when you bake a cake from
scratch there's often a stage called
creaming where you beat solid fat to
create air bubbles within it but with a
box the solid fat shortening in this
case is already mixed in there so there
can be no creaming stage the contents of
this box have been formulated to be
whipped in their entirety without going
tough the way that potentially a cake
batter that you made from
could go tough if you over mix it if
your box cakes aren't coming out well
dr. Miller suspects it's because you're
not following the instructions that tell
you to beat the batter for a good two
minutes after you get everything
incorporated continued mixing it breaks
the bubbles that are incorporated into
smaller sized bubbles so you get more
bubbles that are smaller in size that
make a nice fine uniform green in your
final cake and these are the mixed cakes
and you can really see the difference
because the mixed cakes are so smooth
and perfect and the scratch cakes have
bubbles and more like a crust and cracks
on top of them but how do they taste
after we get them all decorated well you
can see how soft the box cake is and it
tastes very sweet too sweet to my taste
here's the scratch cake it's not as
fluffy but it has more of a body to it I
would go so far as to call the chocolate
version of Adriana's scratch cake
clearly superior to the chocolate box
cake
it's just fuzzier richer more
substantial but the softness of the
white cake from the mix is just like
incomparable box cake is very sweet but
the soft consistency is definitely a win
for science because you can't recreate
that with a scratch cake at all it's
just impossible and why can't you well
dr. Miller says it comes down to three
big factors the emulsifiers that are in
this box
there's the fats that are in this box
and specifically how they're integrated
into the rest of the mixture and then
there's the kind of flour we'll start
with the first thing the emulsifiers an
emulsifier is any ingredient that allows
two or more liquids to mix together and
stay mixed together even if they don't
want to the big example would be oil and
water they kind of reject each other on
a chemical level I can smush them
together with brute force but this
mixture is unstable the water in fat
will eventually separate now if I mix in
an egg yolk I can get a smooth and
stable emulsion egg yolks contain
lecithin a molecule that can join up
with water on one end and with fat on
the other
and there it's the bond between the two
warring camps the hi-tech emulsifiers
that are in this box allowed the batter
to hold on to more water and oil than it
normally could that'll get you a more
moist texture and crucially the
emulsifiers allow the batter to hold on
to more bubbles that would otherwise
just pop so in your commercial cake mix
it has the right type of emulsifiers
that help the air to be there's gonna be
trapped but it helps hold the air
bubbles in the aqueous or water phase of
the batter but when you I'm making it at
home you don't have those specific type
of and most of ours available we do have
some options in here for example egg
yolks
that's why recipes for particularly rich
and moist cakes often call for extra egg
yolks it's for the emulsifiers that they
have dr. Miller says you can also look
for shortening that has some of these
more high-tech emulsifiers in it not to
advertise for Crisco but that's what we
have here and it will stay on there that
it has mono and diglycerides and then
those are an emulsifier so it works well
because that helps to stabilize and get
more air whipped into the shortening
phase and indeed we see mono and
diglycerides mentioned right here on the
Duncan Hines box there's other
emulsifiers you can buy like soy
lecithin but what are the odds that
you're gonna come up with a better
formula than all of the highly paid
highly educated food scientists that
they have working at ConAgra doing
thousands and thousands and thousands of
experiments to nail the perfect formula
that gets you a perfectly reliable cake
every single time science
it's like magic that works now let's
talk about the fats in here cakes often
have a mixture of solid and liquid fats
in this case the Box tells us to add our
own veg oil but the solid fat the
shortening is already in the Box
shortening is great because it has a
long shelf life it doesn't have any
water it in like butter does dr. Miller
says the problem with shortening is that
it breaks foams the air bubbles that
we're talking about but science has a
solution all the dry ingredients and the
short me go through this cake finisher
which kind of just smears the shortening
on the flour particles so if you take a
cake mix and you kind of like
grab a handful and squeeze it it'll kind
of stick together that's why because of
the shortly so that's how they get
enough fat for great flavor and soft
texture because it's it's done that way
because if they just had free shortening
then it will break the foam and you
won't be able to get as much air with
gin and now we come to the flower itself
box cakes are typically what Baker's
call high ratio cakes meaning that they
actually have more sugar in them than
flour because a people like sugar B
because really sweet cakes tend to keep
for longer and the shortening helps with
that too and C really sweet cakes are
stronger structurally you can build
multi-layer cakes out of them without
their air pockets collapsing and the
bites will be less crumbly on your fork
so when you have a high ratio cake which
has so much sugar then the flour used
for that is typically chlorine treated
so what the chlorine does is it changes
the properties of the starch and the
flour so it oxidizes the starch and that
changes how the starch is able to absorb
water it can now soak up and hold a lot
more water and those oxidized starches
are better at holding everything
together in a nice structural mesh and
preventing the cake from collapsing
under the weight of the sugar the water
or any additional layers that you're
putting on top the flour has also been
milled more finely than normal flour
probably through a process called pin
knowing so after they make the flour
they'll put it through a special little
mill with pins that really break down
the particle size so it's a very very
fine particle size and if you kind of
feel it you would give it just a little
silky that again helps the flour to gel
in the water and create that superior
structural mesh to hold all the other
ingredients now you can buy super finely
milled chlorinated cake flour at the
store but again an army of lab coats
have specifically formulated the flour
in here to work synergistically with all
of the other ingredients in here what
are the odds that you're going to top
them and indeed even though very few
will publicly admit to it some
professional cake bakers do use boxed
cake mixes at least as a base they might
add additional
things to it that's what dr. Miller does
at home my Baker friend Adriana says a
box cake can be a huge time-saver in a
commercial context it just takes a sec
to mix and it bakes faster probably
because it's less dense but she says
there are some styles of cake that
should never be made from a box like say
pound cake
pound cake is supposed to exhibit the
opposite of all of these traits that we
get from a box it's supposed to be more
dense and I love the crust that's on top
and box cakes don't give you that box
cakes have a very thin and kind of film
on top but it is not it's not a true
crust like a scratch cake but let's
assume for the sake of argument that
your goal is to create a cake with the
characteristics of a box cake something
that's light fluffy and very sweet is
there any reason in that case to not
bake from a box is it cheating there's a
famous historical anecdote about this
lots of cake mixes used to have
dehydrated eggs in them all you had to
do was add water then in the mid 20th
century a famous psychologist and
marketing expert named Ernest dictor
suggested that manufacturers should try
leaving out the eggs that way housewives
would feel less like they were cheating
there'd still be some work for them to
do so that's what the manufacturers did
and then sales skyrocketed at least that
is the story reality is probably a
little more complicated than that if you
want to know more I recommend this book
by food historian and journalist Laura
Shapiro it's linked in the description
but anyway the moral opposition to cake
mixes is an example of what I would call
the feeling of virtue without the
substance of virtue hardship
self-sacrifice these are virtuous things
when we do them in a service of a cause
like say someone else's well-being like
if I go hungry so that my kids can have
food to eat
that's virtuous but what if I refrain
from eating purely because I want to
look a little bit better on TV this is
not a hypothetical scenario I'm
literally doing this right now I want
more of that cake so bad it feels
virtuous because virtue often involves
denying yourself something that you want
but for whom am i sacrificing what cause
am i serving the cause is purely my own
vanity and I don't think that's virtuous
I mean I don't think it's a bad either
it just is likewise I don't think
there's any real virtue in making your
own
or dessert the hard way it's merely the
feeling the illusion of virtue so if I
want a cake with these characteristics I
am baking from a box but I don't always
want to cake with these characteristics
in fact I really preferred Adriana's
scratch version of that cookies and
cream cake and yes the recipe for that
cake will be my next release I'm so
grateful that Adriana was willing to
share her hard-earned cake skills with
me and guess what there's a whole
website like that full of people like
that it's called Skillshare it's an
online community where instructors share
all kinds of creative and
entrepreneurial skills that you can use
to enrich or perhaps even change your
life as much as I clearly believe in the
value of YouTube tutorials Skillshare
classes are much more than that they go
way deeper they're interactive you have
assignments and they're structured
you're not adrift cobbling together bits
from this source and that source some
people learn well like that but most
people learn better in a structured
environment with a logical flow so you
want to learn something harder than cake
you want to learn how to design user
experiences you know user interfaces for
products you can take Marika McCluskey's
intro to UX class she's one of the
world's experts in this stuff so your
project in this class is to conduct your
own usability evaluation you get her
class in thousands more Skillshare
classes with your membership it's
unlimited and you get two months of
Skillshare premium for free by using my
link in the description and after that
is just $10 a month for an annual
subscription it's a steal it's a new
year and a new skill can bring all kinds
of new things to your life
sure has for mine thanks to skill share
for sponsoring this video and get
excited for that cake recipe I'm gonna
break all your fitness resolutions